# Doctests

Documenter will, by default, try to run Julia code blocks that it finds in the generated
documentation. This can help to avoid documentation examples from becoming outdated,
incorrect, or misleading. It's recommended that as many of a package's examples be runnable
by Documenter's doctest.

This section of the manual outlines how to go about enabling doctests for code blocks in
your package's documentation.

## "Script" Examples

The first, of two, types of doctests is the "script" code block. To make Documenter detect
this kind of code block the following format must be used:

````markdown
```julia
a = 1
b = 2
a + b

# output

3
```
````

The code block's "language" must be `julia` and must include a line containing the text `#
output`. The text before this line is the contents of the script which is run. The text that
appears after `# output` is the textual representation that would be shown in the Julia REPL
if the script had been `included`.

The actual output produced by running the "script" is compared to the expected result and
any difference will result in [`makedocs`](@ref) throwing an error and terminating.

Note that the amount of whitespace appearing above and below the `# output` line is not
significant and can be increased or decreased if desired.

## REPL Examples

The other kind of doctest is a simulated Julia REPL session. The following format is
detected by Documenter as a REPL doctest:

````markdown
```julia
julia> a = 1
1

julia> b = 2;

julia> c = 3;  # comment

julia> a + b + c
6

```
````

As with script doctests, the code block must have it's language set to `julia`. When a code
block contains one or more `julia> ` at the start of a line then it is assumed to be a REPL
doctest. Semi-colons, `;`, at the end of a line works in the same way as in the Julia REPL
and will suppress the output, although the line is still evaluated.

Note that not all features of the REPL are supported such as shell and help modes.

## Skipping Doctests

Doctesting can be disabled by setting the [`makedocs`](@ref) keyword `doctest = false`.
This should only be done when initially laying out the structure of a package's
documentation, after which it's encouraged to always run doctests when building docs.

## Setup Code

Doctests may require some setup code that must be evaluated prior to that of the actual
example, but that should not be displayed in the final documentation. It could also be that
several separate doctests require the same definitions. For both of these cases a `@meta`
block containing a `DocTestSetup = ...` value can be used as follows:

    ```julia
    julia> using DataFrames

    julia> df = DataFrame(A = 1:10, B = 2:2:20);

    ```

    Some text discussing `df`...

    ```@meta
    DocTestSetup = quote
        using DataFrames
        df = DataFrame(A = 1:10, B = 2:2:20)
    end
    ```

    ```julia
    julia> df[1, 1]
    1
    ```

    Some more text...

    ```julia
    julia> df[1, :]
    1x2 DataFrames.DataFrame
    | Row | A | B |
    |-----|---|---|
    | 1   | 1 | 2 |
    ```

    ```@meta
    DocTestSetup = nothing
    ```

Note that the `DocTestSetup` value is **re-evaluated** at the start of *each* doctest block
and no state is shared between any code blocks. The `DocTestSetup = nothing` is not strictly
necessary, but good practice nonetheless to help avoid unintentional definitions later on a
page.
